# ODA 101
This section describes basic ODA concepts and outlines its main data sources.

## What is ODA?
**Official Development Assistance (ODA)** is financial aid aimed at promoting economic and welfare development in developing countries, i.e. international development aid. The **Development Assistance Committee (DAC)** is an OECD forum composed by developed economies and the EU, which decides how ODA is implemented and monitors its effectiveness. ODA donors include DAC member and non-member countries, multilateral organisations and private institutions. Furthermore, the DAC maintains a list of low- and middle-income countries who are eligible to receive ODA.

There are two main types of ODA: 
- **Bilateral** aid represents flows from official government sources directly to a recipient country.
- **Multilateral** aid represents contributions from official government sources to multilateral agencies, which use them to fund their own development programmes.

The key to understanding the difference between bilateral and multilateral aid is knowing who controls the funds. Bilateral aid happens when a country provides funds for a specific development project in a recipient country/region, even if the funds go through a multilateral organisation. On the other hand, if a country makes a contribution to a multilateral organisation, and the organisation then decides how to allocate the funds, it is considered multilateral aid. 

ODA can take the form of grants, provided free of interest and with not provision for repayment, or loans, which must be repaid with interest (although at a lower than market rate). Up until 2018, grants and loans were measured in **ODA flows**, i.e. by reporting the granted flow of cash or the face value of the loan. From 2018 onwards, ODA is measured as the loan's **grant equivalent**, such that more generous loans result in higher ODA values. For more information on ODA flows and grant equivalents, visit the [OECD's website](https://www.oecd.org/en/topics/sub-issues/oda-eligibility-and-conditions/official-development-assistance--definition-and-coverage.html).

One final distinction in ODA figures is between commitments and disbursements. **Commitments** represent donor's intentions and fluctuate as aid policies change. **Disbursements** on the other hand, show actual payments and as such, are better able to describe aid flows from the recipient’s point of view.

ODA data is **updated twice a year**. In April, high-level (aggregated) figures are published on total ODA by donor countries for the previous calendar year. In December, these figures are updated with detail on how the funds were allocated by recipient country, sector, geographical region, and income group. Additionally, partial database updates occur in June and September.

For more information visit the [OECD's ODA webpage](https://www.oecd.org/en/topics/official-development-assistance-oda.html#related-policy-issues) and [FAQs](https://www.oecd.org/en/data/insights/data-explainers/2024/07/frequently-asked-questions-on-official-development-assistance-oda.html). 

## Main ODA tables
These are the main tables used by ONE to get ODA data.

### DAC1
This table contains one row per ODA contribution from a donor entity, as reported by the donor. In this sense, the DAC1 paints the ODA picture from the donor perspective and it is useful to retrieve ODA contributions from a single or group of donors. 

For more information on the DAC1 table visit the [OECD Data Explorer](https://data-explorer.oecd.org/vis?tm=DAC1&pg=0&snb=1&df[ds]=dsDisseminateFinalDMZ&df[id]=DSD_DAC1%40DF_DAC1&df[ag]=OECD.DCD.FSD&df[vs]=1.3&dq=DAC...1140%2B1160..Q.&lom=LASTNPERIODS&lo=10&to[TIME_PERIOD]=false).

### DAC2A
The DAC2A table is ONE's default source of ODA data as it is the most complete. It contains one row per ODA contribution from a donor entity to a recipient, as reported by both donors and recipients. The DAC2A paints a more complete ODA picture since the flow of aid can be tracked from donor to recipient. It is therefore useful to get total or disaggregated contributions to a single or group of recipients.

Donor flows are presented at the individual, semi-aggregated and aggregated levels, whereas recipients are included at the individual, sub-regional and regional levels. Due to the different levels of aggregation included in the DAC2A, one must be careful to avoid double-counting.

For more information on the DAC1 table visit the [OECD Data Explorer](https://data-explorer.oecd.org/vis?tm=DAC2A&pg=0&snb=1&df[ds]=dsDisseminateFinalDMZ&df[id]=DSD_DAC2%40DF_DAC2A&df[ag]=OECD.DCD.FSD&df[vs]=1.1&dq=.DPGC.206.USD.Q&lom=LASTNPERIODS&lo=5&to[TIME_PERIOD]=false).
### CRS

### Multisystem